Copyright (C) 2012 The ESPResSo project
 
This file is part of ESPResSo.
 
ESPResSo is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
 
ESPResSo is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
 
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>. 

Description
-----------

(167 words)
ESPResSo is a highly versatile software package for performing and
analyzing scientific Molecular Dynamics many-particle simulations of
coarse-grained atomistic or bead-spring models as they are used in
soft-matter research in physics, chemistry and molecular biology. It
can be used to simulate systems such as polymers, liquid crystals,
colloids, ferrofluids and biological systems, for example DNA and
lipid membranes.

ESPResSo is free, open-source software published under the GNU General
Public License (GPL). It is parallelized and can be employed on
desktop machines, convenience clusters as well as on supercomputers
with hundreds of CPUs. The parallel code is controlled via the
scripting language Tcl, which gives the software its great
flexibility.

ESPResSo is used in scientific working groups all over the world both
as a production platform as well as a research platform for developing
new algorithms and methods and designing new model for coarse-grained
simulations.  It is mainly developed at the Institute for
Computational Physics of the University of Stuttgart, but has
contributors from all over the world.

(329 words)
ESPResSo is a highly versatile software package for performing and
analyzing scientific Molecular Dynamics many-particle simulations of
"coarse-grained" bead-spring models as they are used in soft-matter
research in physics, chemistry and molecular biology. It can be used
to simulate systems such as polymers, liquid crystals, colloids,
ferrofluids and biological systems, for example DNA and lipid
membranes.

In "coarse-grained" models, a whole group of atoms or molecules are
treated as a single bead. Although many details are coarse-grained
away in these models, they can often predict qualitative properties,
such as for example the scaling behavior of a system, and can give
insight into theoretical models.  Due to the drastic reduction of
degrees of freedom, coarse-graining allows to investigate systems
which would be out of reach of the commonly used atom-based
simulations, due to the large time- and length scales of the studied
processes.

ESPResSo is capable of doing classical Molecular dynamics simulations
of many types of systems in different statistical ensembles (NVE, NVT,
NPT) and non-equilibrium situations, using standard potentials such as
the Lennard-Jones or Morse potential. It contains many advanced
simulation algorithms, which take into account hydrodynamic (lattice
Boltzmann) and electrostatic interactions (P3M, ELC, MMMxD). Rigid
bodies can be modelled by virtual site interactions, and it can
integrate rotationally non-invariant particles.

ESPResSo is free, open-source software published under the GNU General
Public License (GPL). It is parallelized and can be employed on
desktop machines, convenience clusters as well as on supercomputers
with hundreds of CPUs. The parallel code is controlled via the
scripting language Tcl, which gives the software its great flexibility
and allows for many unconventional simulation protocols, as are often
required when studying coarse-grained models.

ESPResSo is used in scientific working groups all over the world both
as a production platform as well as a research platform for developing
new algorithms and methods and designing new models for coarse-grained
simulations.  It is mainly developed at the Institute for
Computational Physics of the University of Stuttgart, but has
contributors from all over the world.

Deutsche Übersetzung
--------------------
(316 Wörter)

ESPResSo ist ein sehr flexibles Softwarepaket, mit dessen Hilfe
"vergröberte" Kugel-Feder-Modelle simuliert und analysiert werden
können, wie sie in der Forschung an weicher Materie in Physik, Chemie
und Molekularbiologie eingesetzt werden.  Es ermöglicht
wissenschaftliche Vielteilchensimulationen mit Hilfe der
Molekulardynamikmethode von Systemen wie beispielsweise Polymeren,
Flüssigkristallen, Kolloiden, Ferrofluiden und biologischen Systemen
wie DNS und Lipidmembranen.

In "vergröberten" Modellen werden mehrere Atome oder Moleküle zu einer
einzigen Kugel zusammengefasst.  Obwohl in solchen Modellen viele
Details der zugrundeliegenden Systeme vernachlässigt werden, so können
sie doch oft qualitative Eigenschaften vorhersagen, wie beispielsweise
das Skalierungsverhalten eines Systems, und sie können dabei helfen,
theoretische Modelle besser zu verstehen.  Aufgrund der drastischen
Reduktion der Freiheitsgrade erlaubt die Vergröberung von Modellen es,
Systeme zu untersuchen, die für herkömmliche
Molekulardynamiksimulationen mit atomarer Auflösung aufgrund der
großen Längen- und Zeitskalen unerreichbar sind.

ESPResSo kann klassische Molekularsynamiksimulationen von vierlei
Arten von Systemen in unterschiedlichen statistischen Ensembles (NVE,
NVT, NPT) und Nichtgleichgewichtssituationen durchführen.  Dabei
können einerseits Standardpotentiale wie beispielsweise das
Lennard-Jones- oder das Morse-Potential verwendet werden, andererseits
stellt die Software viele fortgeschrittene Simulationsalgorithmen zur
Verfügung, mit deren Hilfe beispielsweise hydrodynamische
(Lattice-Boltzmann, Dissipative Particle Dynamics) und
elektrostatische (P3M, ELC, MMMxD) Wechselwirkungen berechnet werden
können.  Steife Körper können mit Hilfe von Wechselwirkungen zwischen
sogenannten "virtuellen" Teilchen modelliert werden, und
nicht-rotationsinvariante Teilchen können integriert werden.

ESPResSo ist freie, quelloffene Software, die unter der GNU General
Public License (GPL) veröffentlicht wird. Es ist parallelisiert und
kann sowohl auf Arbeitsplatzrechnern, auf kleinen Rechenclustern als
auch auf großen Supercomputern mit hunderten von Prozessoren effizient
eingesetzt werden.  Der parallele Simulationskern wird mittels der
Skriptsprache Tcl angesteuert.  Dies gibt der Software seine große
Flexibilität und ermöglicht viele ungewöhnliche Simulationsprotokolle,
wie sie bei vergröberten Simulationen häufig benötigt werden.

ESPResSo wird von wissenschaftlichen Arbeitsgruppen überall auf der
Welt eingesetzt, sowohl um Simulationsdaten zu produzieren, als auch
um neue Algorithmen und vergröberte Modelle zu entwickeln. Die
Software wird maßgeblich am Institut für Computerphysik an der
Universität Stuttgart entwickelt, jedoch tragen Entwickler von überall
auf der Welt dazu bei.
